README.md, before:

# TE-NGS
TE-NGS, genomics tools for TE-enriched next generation sequencing and detection of active transposable elements

# Quick start  
TE-NGS is implemented in R and distributed using [packrat](https://github.com/rstudio/packrat) management system for R packages and their dependencies. Currently uses R version 3.1.2.  

Navigate to /scripts where packrat snapshot is built   
 
    $ cd scripts

First time launching R, packrat will build the local library of required packages and dependencies  

Ensure packrat is on  

    > packrat::on()

Check that packrat is up to date 
 
    > packrat::status()  

Make sure /annotations files are uncompressed!  
TO DO: update R function to handle gzip input files  

Run the script in test mode: compare output provided as expected in /test, eg. 
    
    $ R --no-restore --no-save --no-readline --quiet < R_get_TE_calls_v0.1.r --args ../test/ ../test/seq_opt_table.txt 201 test

Run on your sample of choice:  

    $ R --no-restore --no-save --no-readline --quiet < R_get_TE_calls_v0.1.r --args ../foo/ ../foo/seq_opt_table.txt 201 sample  

where /foo points to your own bams generated from the TE-enriched [protocol](#)  

See the [project page](https://ekviky.github.io/TE-NGS/) for more information

Commit message:

update README.md installation from tarball

README.md, after:

# TE-NGS
TE-NGS, genomics tools for TE-enriched next generation sequencing and detection of active transposable elements

# Quick start  
TE-NGS is implemented in R and distributed using [packrat](https://github.com/rstudio/packrat) management system for R packages and their dependencies. Currently uses R version 3.1.2 and packrat is built using packrat 0.4.8-1  

Navigate to /distrib and unbundle the packrat tarball    
 
    > packrat::unbundle(bundle='scripts-2017-07-31.tar.gz', where='foo/TE-NGS/distrib')  
where foo is wherever the TE-NGS repo lives  

Should see progress message  

    Untarring 'scripts-2017-07-31.tar.gz' in directory '/foo/TE-NGS/distrib'...  

    ...  

    Done! The project has been unbundled and restored at:  
    - "/foo/TE-NGS/distrib/scripts"  

Check that packrat is up to date 
 
    > packrat::status()  

Navigate to /scripts where packrat snapshot is built  
    
    $ cd scripts  

Run the script in test mode: compare output provided as expected in /test, eg.   

    $  R --no-restore --no-save --no-readline --quiet < R_get_TE_calls_v0.1.r --args ../test/ ../test/seq_opt_table.txt 201 test  


Run on your sample of choice:  

    $ R --no-restore --no-save --no-readline --quiet < R_get_TE_calls_v0.1.r --args ../bar/ ../bar/seq_opt_table.txt 201 sample  

where /bar points to your own bams generated from the TE-enriched [protocol](#)  

Troubleshooting:  
Make sure /annotations files are uncompressed!  
TO DO: update R function to handle gzip input files  

    $ gunzip *.gz

See the [project page](https://ekviky.github.io/TE-NGS/) for more information
